I want to talk to you about democracy from the U.S. perspective, our definition of democracy, and the examples we see – both positive and negative – within democracy and elections in the United States.

On paper, democracy is deceptively easy.  It is the act of holding free and fair elections, the people having a say in their government.  But ensuring a free and fair and well-run vote is not easy.  We have seen that throughout history and in many nations, including the U.S.  As you probably know, we are at the start of our presidential election cycle with the first primaries and caucuses over the past two weeks.  Is everyone familiar with the terms primary and caucus?  A brief explanation then for those who aren’t familiar.

Primaries and caucuses are the tools U.S. political parties use to help determine who will ultimately become the nominee for the Presidency at each party’s national convention.  Each of the state level parties has its own method of deciding who they will support.  In some states there are elections – primaries.  In other states, caucuses are used.  A caucus is a gathering of people who discuss and decide on nominees within their locality.  Primaries are individual voters and anonymous voting.  In both cases, many states also send ‘uncommitted’ delegates to the national party convention which means that these delegates are not tied to vote for a particular nominee.  So, while sometimes it is very clear who will be a party’s nominee, it is also true that it can be undecided right up until the convention meets at the national level.

Two weeks ago, we saw the difficulties of balloting when the results from the Democratic Caucus in the state of Iowa were delayed due to a technical glitch in an app used by local election monitors to report their results to the state-level party leaders.  And with that glitch, the legitimacy of Iowa’s vote was called into question by some.  I make no judgment on that issue, but it does illustrate the importance of methods that are thoroughly vetted and tested for security and reliability.  For democracy to function, the population must have confidence that their vote is counted and that their vote matters.   I can speak personally to this as what we call an absentee voter.  After the contested vote in Florida between Bush and Gore in 2000, it came out that some states weren’t even counting the absentee ballots if the number of absentee votes was less than the number of votes between two candidates.  After that discovery and the subsequent outrage, many states made it mandatory to count these votes.

Elections are an important, fundamental part of democracy which we inherited from the Greeks and Romans.  For a democracy to thrive, however you define it, you need to start with citizens being assured their voices are heard and that they are free from reprisals for the selections they make.  And the easiest – or perhaps the only way – to ensure that is with free and fair elections.  In the world today, we define free and fair elections as ones that are periodic, held by secret ballot, and based on universal and equal suffrage.

Within certain limits, everyone needs to be able to participate in an election.  Not so long ago, laws existed that banned women and people of color from voting.  Fortunately for us today, outmoded laws that outright restricted suffrage on these bases are remnants of a sad past.  But does that mean everyone is able to vote?  We as societies must ensure the elderly, the disabled, the infirm, the literacy challenged – we must ensure the most vulnerable citizens in our countries have access to the ballot as well.  That may mean ensuring polling stations are wheelchair accessible, printing ballots in other languages for citizens who do not speak English or making sure that those who are confined to their home can vote in a secure manner.

And I think that is an important point. For democracy to work, voting must be secure.  We as voters must be confident our vote will be counted and not thrown away or spoiled.  We must be sure no magic bag of ballots will show up at the last minute to overwhelm our legitimate ballots.  We must be confident in the political system of which we are a part.  If we are not, it can call into question our participation and the legitimacy of our elected leaders and their mandate to pursue their agenda.  It can lead to apathy and a population less and less inclined to believe their voice is heard, their opinion matters, or that they hold the power.  And that, surely, is a quick way for democracy to be hollowed out and extinguished.

Now, ensuring voting is secure is not an easy task. It is something in the U.S. we work hard to ensure.  And we do this through our political systems and the transparency and accountability built into them.  We have representatives from each of the two major parties working together at the voting offices throughout our nation.  On election day, each polling station is staffed by volunteers from each of the parties sitting side-by-side as voters cast their ballots.  We have both parties sitting together counting the ballots, ensuring at all levels that the count is fair and that there has been nothing done to alter the outcome.  They do all this with the ever present eyes of independent media who can track the tally as it comes in, who can see the process fully, and who can quickly report the results to ensure a lack of information does not provide cover for fraud.  This requires significant effort and commitment on the part of paid personnel and volunteers.

And one thing that makes the U.S. experiment different and unique, I think, is that our elections are decentralized.  The rules, procedures, schedules – all of that is determined in the 50 state capitals throughout our nation.  Elections are run by the states, giving us 50 different ways to conduct the elections.  They all share similar traits as the ones I mentioned earlier, but in other ways they are different.  Some require voters to be registered months before the election, others only weeks, and some allow voters to register the day of the election.  The state of North Dakota does not require voters to register at all.  The same variety can be seen in laws and procedures for requiring IDs to vote, which some states mandate and others do not; facilitating absentee voting via mail or email; and the process and requirements for how candidates get on the ballot in the first place.

This speaks to, I think, the fact that the U.S. is not a nation with 50 administrative district divisions, but a nation made up of 50 states that retain their own sovereign rights over a myriad of issues as outlined in our Constitution.  It is a system set up by our Founders in the shadow of the British monarchy to actively work against centralized power.  Our system is also designed to decentralize political power and influence, to have state leaders who have authority through popular votes and levers of government with which to challenge the national status quo.  It is designed to protect the minority against the majority, rural agrarian families against the wishes of a more urban elite.  That is why we have the Senate, where each state is equally represented regardless of population size; why we retain the Electoral College, which provides incentives to presidential candidates to work in the interests of less populated areas, ensuring they do not just play to the interests of a few high population areas.  As Dr. Abiamofo mentioned, “majority rule but minority rights.” We sometimes say tyranny of the majority if the system does not take into account minority rights and needs.

The U.S. electoral and political system is, of course, not a perfect system, no system is.  But it is our system.  It is the system we have developed as a society to attempt to ensure our elections are as free and fair as possible.

But you will note in the above description the number of people needed to serve at voting stations, to be volunteers as the votes are counted, and to work as journalists.  The participation of each one of us in the democratic process is an essential pillar of democracy.

Another form of participation is called “vigilance,” which means keeping an eye on the freedoms you have and the quality of your democracy.

Vigilance requires that you be informed to some degree and take an interest in the news and study the current issues.  If you do not know what is going on, how can you be an active member of society, how can you be engaged in your democracy?  Using that knowledge, you can then complain, or argue, voice your opinion or hold elected officials accountable with your vote.  You can get involved in a political party or join an NGO to advocate for a cause that is near and dear to your heart.  Citizen participation can also mean putting yourself forward as a political candidate.

A critical factor in citizen participation is that the government allows the citizenry the space and freedom to meaningfully participate.  And this brings to the forefront the importance of another aspect of vigilance – citizens must demand that freedom and space to participate from their governments and actively work to preserve their freedoms.  There have been, and continue to be, nations around the world that label themselves democracies, but the practice of democracy is so curtailed, and the participation by citizens so restricted that these states are really thinly veiled authoritarians.  I highly recommend to you Freedom House’s study of a couple of years ago titled Modern Authoritarianism: Origins, Anatomy, Outlook.  It very clearly, and with much research and evidence, details how nominally democratic governments act in authoritarian manners by actively working to suppress academics, independent journalists, and targeting civil society through repressive laws limiting individuals’ and organizations’ ability to effect changes.